# Baseball Analytics
&#x1F534; Under Construction - may be ready for use by 12/21/19  

Scripts to download, parse, and prepare baseball data for analysis with Pandas.

Additional scripts to optionally load data into Postgres for analysis with SQL.

## Summary

Retrosheet has play-by-play data for almost every Major League Baseball (MLB) game.  Lahman has MLB data summarized per year.

The Lahman data is very close to the Retrosheet data, summed per year.  The older the data is, the more games that are missing from Retrosheet, with almost no games missing since 1975, and less than 1% of the games missing since 1955.

The Lahman data is tidy and has several csv files.  The latest available description of each csv file has been copied to the data/lahman directory.

Retrosheet is not distributed as csv files, but as text files which have play-by-play information.  This data must be parsed to create csv files.  The parsing will be done with open source parsers from Dr. T. L. Turocy described below.  The description of the generated csv files can itself be generated from the parsers.  These descriptions have been generated and copied to the data/retrosheet directory.

As of December 2019, Lahman has data through the 2018 season whereas Retrosheet has data through the 2019 season.

The scripts allow for data analysis using either Pandas or SQL.  It is not necessary to use both Pandas and SQL.

The field names in both datasets will be changed to lowercase, with words separated by underscores.  A few additional name changes will be made, such as Lahman's "gidp" being renamed to "gdp" to match what is used in Retrosheet.

Although use of Postgres is optional, field names which require double quotes in Postgres will be renamed so that double quotes are not required.  Some fields which must be renamed include: 2b, 3b, year, last, first, name, rank, start and end.

The scripts were tested using all data for Lahman and the data from 1955 onward for Retrosheet, although the scripts should work fine for all data.  The year 1955 was chosen as this is the first year in which both the National and American League recorded statistics for sacrifice flies, sacrifice bunts, and intentional walks.

#### Statistics per Role

A baseball player may have several roles during the same game, such as batter, fielder, and pitcher.  Most statistics are unique to the role, but some are not.  A player can both hit a home run in the role of batter and allow a home run in the role of pitcher.

There are nine fielding roles.  A player can make a put-out in the role of second baseman and later make a put-out in the role of first baseman.

#### Script Summary

All scripts have help.  For example: python lahman_download.py --help

* **lahman_download.py** -- downloads the Lahman data
* **retrosheet_download.py** -- downloads the Retrosheet data
* **lahman_wrangle.py** -- convert to lowercase fieldnames with underscores, custom parse dates, etc.
* **retrosheet_datadictionary.py** -- generate a description of the generated csv files from the parsers
* **retrosheet_parse.py** -- generate the csv files
* **retrosheet_wrangle.py** -- convert to lowercase fieldnames with underscores, custom parse time, etc.
* and more ...



## Data Sources

### Lahman

The most recent data will be downloaded from:  https://github.com/chadwickbureau/baseballdatabank/archive/master.zip

#### Lahman Data Dictionary

The most recent data dictionary is:  http://www.seanlahman.com/files/database/readme2017.txt  

This file is also copied to this repo at: data/lahman/readme2017.txt

#### CSV Data Files

The csv files for Lahman are tidy.

* **per player per year**
  * Batting.csv
  * Fielding.csv
  * Pitching.csv
* **per team per year**
  * Teams.csv
* **reference tables**
  * People.csv
* and more ...

### Retrosheet

The play-by-play data will be downloaded from: http://www.retrosheet.org/events/{year}eve.zip

#### CSV Data Files

The csv files must be generated by parsing the play-by-play data files.

The **cwdaily** parser generates statistics per player per game.  Attributes are prefixed by b for batter, p for pitcher and f_{pos} for fielder where position is one of P, C, 1B, 2B, 3B, SS, LF, CF, RF.

The **cwgame** parser generates statistics per team per game.

The cwgame produced csv file will be made tidy by creating 2 csv files from it:

- game.csv: game attributes (time, attendance, etc.)
- team_game.csv: batting/pitching/fielding attributes per team per game

##### Parsers

The open source parsers created by Dr. T. L. Turocy will be used.

Parser Description: http://chadwick.sourceforge.net/doc/cwtools.html  
Parser Executables and Source: https://sourceforge.net/projects/chadwick/  

At the time of this writing, version 0.7.2 is the latest version.  Executable versions of the parsers are available for Windows.  Source code is available for Linux and MacOS.

##### How to Build Parsers on Linux

If you do not already have a build environment:

1. sudo apt install gcc
2. sudo apt install build-essential

cd to the source directory:

1. ./configure
2. make
3. sudo make install

Result

1. The cw command line tools will be installed in /usr/local/bin.
2. The cw library will be installed in /usr/local/lib.

To allow the command line tools to find the shared libraries, add the following to your .bashrc and then: source .bashrc
`export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${LD_LIBRARY_PATH}:/usr/local/lib`

#### Retrosheet Data Dictionary

The retrosheet_datadictionary.py script will generate a description of the output of the cwdaily and cwgame parsers.

This script has been run and the descriptions have been saved to:  data/retrosheet

* cwdaily_datadictionary.txt
* cwgame_datadictionary.txt
